Adam Chlipala's Paper-Writing Advice/Hangups

Let's try to collect our shared ideas on paper-writing best practices
here, as there are quite a few different norms floating around.

Keep papers in Git

...and not monstrosities like Overleaf! The latter (1) can't be used
offline (e.g. on a flight without WiFi), (2) provide very primitive
models for version control (most importantly, no way for collaborators
to group units of related changes that should be merged as wholes), and
(3) typically don't provide the same level of keyboard shortcuts and
other ways for experts to amp up their editing throughput. It really
isn't an option for some coauthors to use Overleaf and some GitHub with
their favorite editors, because an Overleaf user always takes precedence
in concurrency control: while Overleaf users are editing continuously,
it is impossible for Git users to push new changes, because they are
continuously told they need to merge.

Also watch out for Google Docs

Folks typically won't propose writing whole papers in Google Docs, but
what about author responses? It's a common choice, to facilitate easy
collaboration. However, there is a risk: since the author response can't
be submitted as a Google Doc or PDF, a potentially error-prone process
of converting to Markdown is saved for the end. Do you ask all of your
coauthors to check the final Markdown version, which you may create an
hour before the response deadline? You can try writing Markdown format
characters within Google Docs, but you might always miss that some
important formatting is indicated "natively," without Markdown
characters.

Adam prefers to work with Markdown within Git all along, though he's
less adamant about this point than most on this page.

One sentence per line in LaTeX source files

Otherwise, arbitrary line breaking creates noncanonicity of
representation for the same logical content. It becomes hard to read
diffs and see what really changed in a paragraph, as adjacent sentences
get caught in the crossfire, and as arbitrary line-wrapping consequences
follow from small changes and trigger change attribution to sentences
that weren't affected.

One LaTeX source file for the body of the paper

1.  Easier text search-and-replace
2.  Easier to run spellcheck

Capitalization in BibTeX entries is your responsibility

Many common BibTeX styles (for citations) will lowercase all words of
paper titles unless you override the behavior, by putting relevant words
inside curly braces. Check the rendered entries for your bibliographic
references and be sure capitalization is correct everywhere. The most
common mistake is not preserving capitalization for acronyms or other
proper nouns.

Pretty much never cite SIGPLAN Notices

Before the big-four SIGPLAN conferences moved to PACMPL, their papers
were published in proceedings per conference edition. Those proceedings
were also copied in SIGPLAN Notices, nominally a newsletter. For papers
from that era, some ways to look up their citations will give you two:
one for the proceedings and one for SIGPLAN Notices. Always choose the
proceedings! It just conveys so much more useful information to be clear
about which conference a paper appeared in. The reader can't be expected
to recognize which SIGPLAN Notices volumes were proceedings of major
conferences and therefore contain only papers that survived rigorous
peer review, where other issues may include what are essentially opinion
pieces.

Use autoref for all references to sections, etc.

I'm on-the-fence about this one, but it will probably pay off to stay
consistent!

Use esh for code syntax highlighting

...including all being willing to install esh fully and rerun it to
rehighlight snippets? (This one is getting tougher as VSCode has become
quite competitive with Emacs, so many of my students never learn/install
Emacs anymore.)

Name paper repos in terms of content, not target publication venue

It's demoralizing to have to rename the repo. ;)

Save reviews and rebuttals, for all venues submitted to, in a paper's repo somehow

The exact format of file-system layout, etc., isn't important.

Quantifiers punctuated with periods, not commas

Proper math notation looks like ∀ x. x > 7 rather than ∀ x, x > 7. We
see the latter a lot in papers, but that's because notations from Rocq
and friends have been imported improperly. (Note that conventions vary
across fields; I'm explaining what has been standard in programming
languages and formal methods.)

Proper handling of multicharacter variable names in LaTeX

Inside a LaTeX math formula, it's tempting to write multicharacter
variable names without extra formatting, but LaTeX actually treats those
"identifiers" as multiplications of multiple single-character variables,
which leads to ugly spacing. Instead, the canonical fix is to enclose
the variable name in \mathit{...}.

Proper spacing after periods in LaTeX

Be careful using periods outside math mode, in positions that don't
correspond to ends to sentences. When followed by spaces, these periods
need to have backslashes after them to get the proper spacing.

- Bad: ~~Thank you very much, Mr. Roboto.~~
- Good: Thank you very much, Mr.\ Roboto.

English-language corner

Adam is a stickler about English usage, and a number of issues aren't
widely appreciated, even by most faculty. Here's a sampling.

Proper grouping of phrases into first-class units

We often take lists of words and group them together so that,
grammatically, they function as new words. One example is "file system."
The trouble is that parsing sentences becomes difficult, when we need to
do some semantic analysis to discover boundaries of groupings with
first-class status. It's unfortunate if we need to understand meaning
before we can even find the tree structure of a sentence. Luckily,
English has a standard fix! Less luckily, it's not widely understood.

The rule of formal English is that a grouping of words into a
first-class unit separates words by spaces when the grouping functions
as noun, and it separates words by hyphens when the grouping functions
as a modifier (adjective or adverb). So, here are two correct usage
examples:

- My dog invented a new file system. (The file system is an object we
  are describing.)
- My dog is now a file-system expert. (Knowledge of file systems is a
  property of the expert.)

As always, there are exceptions. After adverbs ending in "-ly", we don't
include these hyphens. So, ironically, "dependently-typed" is wrong
every single place we see it, even though it is by far the most common
use of hyphens in our research world!

More pairs of examples of correct usage, where switching the convention
for any example is wrong:

- The software for my IoT toaster is open-source. (We attach a quality
  to the software.)
- My IoT toaster has open source. (The word "open" is now functioning by
  itself, as a modifier to the source that the toaster has.)
- My language supports type inference.
- I have implemented a type-inference algorithm.

Hyphens vs. dashes

A lot of folks are sloppy using the words "hyphen" and "dash." The
former is generally written "-", and the latter is generally written
"--". Hyphens are used to combine word sequences into what, logically
speaking, are single words. Dashes are used to combine phrases within
sentences, where those phrases can't just be dropped in to act like
single words, within larger phrases. Examples:

- Please send him an out-of-band message.
- A reasonable person might object to my type-inference algorithm -- its
  reliance on a blockchain promotes global warming and subverts
  democracy.

Plurality mismatches

Many words in English have variants for singular and plural cases, and
when words within a sentence are connected semantically, they must make
identical decisions on singular vs. plural. Here is an example faulty
sentence.

- ~~We maintain a list of pairs of an integer and an animated GIF.~~
  (Each pair includes a different integer and GIF, while the wording
  here suggests a single pair of them shared across all list elements.)

Here are correct sentences.

- We maintain a list of pairs, each containing an integer and an
  animated GIF.
- We maintain a list of pairs of integers and animated GIFs.

Using commas to separate phrases

A sentence typically includes a subject (the noun that does something)
and a verb and maybe object (an action, optionally with a target).
Sometimes a subject has two different associated verb phrases in one
sentence. We should not use a comma to separate those phrases. However,
when we change subjects within a sentence, these phrases should be
separated by commas. We don't get editorial freedom to include commas
wherever we like the effects they have on reading order with breaks to
catch our breath.

Two faulty sentences:

- ~~Broccoli has miraculous health properties, and tastes good.~~
- ~~Broccoli has miraculous health properties and kale is right up there
  as well.~~

The corrected sentences:

- Broccoli has miraculous health properties and tastes good.
- Broccoli has miraculous health properties, and kale is right up there
  as well.

Semicolons in lists

When writing a list of items where at least one item contains its own
internal comma, it is important to use semicolons to separate the
top-level items. Otherwise, a reader needs semantic understanding of the
sentence even to parse its nested structure.

Bad:

- ~~The paper was coauthored by Tweedledee, who implemented the
  Makefile, and Tweedledum, who designed the compiler.~~

Good:

- The paper was coauthored by Tweedledee, who implemented the Makefile;
  and Tweedledum, who designed the compiler.

Open-to-debate

A number of rules within English are either controversial or are
associated with different sets of conventions, say from different
countries. While in the latter case, we generally agree to disagree, the
more fully controversial decisions can get some readers really riled up.
In those cases, you just can't win, and it's better to find ways to
rephrase sentences so that you don't need to face the controversial
question! Here are a few examples.

Quotes and periods/commas

A style popular in the U.S. says that a period or comma after a quoted
phrase should stay within the quotes, while a style popular in Europe
says the opposite. Adam grew up with the former and so prefers the first
of the next two over the second, though admittedly there is genuine
ambiguity in which style to adopt.

- Whenever he hears the word "strudel," Scrappy turns into a werewolf.
- Whenever he hears the word "strudel", Scrappy turns into a werewolf.

No one is going to get too bent-out-of-shape seeing either convention.

Splitting infinitives

In the U.S., schoolchildren often learn the rule that one mustn't split
an infinitive. An infinitive is a "to" phrase, like "to jump," and
splitting involves adding extra words between "to" and the base verb. An
example violating the rule:

- ~~Kangaroos are able to easily jump over small bookshelves.~~

Fixes we might apply:

- Kangaroos are easily able to jump over small bookshelves.
- Kangaroos are able to jump over small bookshelves easily.

Fixes of the latter kind admittedly can make sentences harder to read
(by moving modifiers further away from what they modify), but at least
everyone will agree they are grammatical and convey the meaning. A
significant fraction of readers are very serious about the
no-split-infinitives rule, considered as part of the definition of
formal English. A significant fraction of readers are very serious about
this rule being a nonsensical attempt to impose Latin grammar on
English. It is worth avoiding split infinitives, to avoid offending
either camp.

Gendered pronouns

In grade school, Adam was taught that English includes no gender-neutral
pronouns to refer to other people. In referring to an unknown person, we
could write either of the following:

- When the average consumer shops, he finds a bewildering variety of soy
  milk on the shelves.
- When the average consumer shops, she finds a bewildering variety of
  soy milk on the shelves.

(Some sources suggest adopting the gender of the writer, as a
tie-breaker, while older sources say that "he" is the right default.)

However, often today we'll see plural pronouns pressed into service as
gender-neutral singulars.

- When the average consumer shops, they find a bewildering variety of
  soy milk on the shelves.

Again this choice is an opportunity to make enemies by adopting either
convention clearly. Especially using "he," some readers will say you're
promoting sexism or intolerance for gender diversity. Using "they," some
readers will say you're ignoring the rules of English. It's best to
restructure sentences to avoid needing to face the question, e.g.:

- While shopping, the average consumer finds a bewildering variety of
  soy milk on the shelves.

Oxford commas

Another difference, on which reasonable people differ, is whether to put
a comma before the "and" in a list of three of more items. Adam grew up
with the first of these two variants (using what's called an "Oxford
comma").

- I come bearing syntax, semantics, and metatheory.
- I come bearing syntax, semantics and metatheory.

"That" vs. "which"

Again reasonable people differ, but it tends to work better to use
"that" for phrases that are essential to sentence meanings, reserving
"which" for phrases adding extra color on top of phrases that still make
sense on their own. The latter phrases are almost always separated by
commas from what came before. Think of this distinction as about whether
additional phrases are needed as logical constraints to determine an
object uniquely.

- Can you please send me the code that you mentioned? (Without the fact
  that someone mentioned the code, we can't resolve "the code" uniquely
  to one semantic object.)
- Can you please send me your code, which I expect to find full of
  edifying comments? (In contrast, attributing the code to a specific
  person is apparently enough to imply which code we mean, in this
  conversation, and we can add some bonus information about that code.)

Common short prefixes

It is actually incorrect to use hyphens to add some common short
prefixes to words. For instance, "non-deterministic" is wrong, while
"nondeterministic" is right. (You will just have to teach your
spellchecker about all of these word variants with prefixes!)

"This" and "that" as nouns

It can be hard to parse sentences that use "this" and "that" as nouns
rather than as modifiers. The reader wonders if another word nearby is
about to be modified, and we can also usually come up with more
descriptive replacement words (or realize that these whole phrases are
expendable!). However, it's probably not grammatically incorrect to
ignore this advice.

- ~~The reason for this is highly technical.~~
- The reason for this omission is highly technical.
- The reason is highly technical. (See, that word wasn't pulling its
  weight anyway! Removing it leaves a strictly better sentence.)

Capitalizing "Boolean"

Didn't you know it's named after George Boole?

Contractions

Some classic sources say contractions (like "don't") shouldn't appear at
all in formal writing. (I'm taking a meta-stand here that this document
itself probably isn't formal writing!)
